Standard
Operational
Procedures
MCH Clinic
This document (SOP) serves as a tool for the
staff to improve the quality of health care
delivery with a view to increase patients’
satisfaction. Thus, everyone must follow and
comply with it.
Prepared By: HNL
MCH Clinic
The Maternal and Child Clinic has been organized to provide services for both well and sick
children from ages 0 month to 14 years old and for postpartum mothers. The specific services
include: 1.) A well-baby clinic that comprises of newborn assessment/health screening for 2
weeks, 6 weeks, 2months, 4 months, 6months, 9 months, 12months, and a yearly follow-up until
a child is 5 years old: 2.) Administration of immunization to all age: 3.) A Pediatric Clinic that
comprised of sick children who required pediatric medical evaluation, and those who are
discharged from Emergency Room and Pediatric Unit and are require follow-up care. 4.)
Pediatric High Risk Clinic and Children with Special Health Care Needs, 5) Minor treatment and
procedures such as breathing treatments, dressing changes irrigation, IV/IM/PO meds
medication administration and etc., are send to OPD or ER.
The clinic has service providers such as pediatricians, registered nurse, practical nurse, nursing
assistants, and data encoder, with coordinated services for pharmacy, radiology, laboratory,
Dental, and other Public Health Clinics.
The clinic has the services accessible to patients on Monday through Friday, form 8:00-4:30, on
appointment and walk-in basis. Any patient who comes to the clinic after 4:30 will be advised to
go the emergency room for treatment. The Saturday immunization clinic for immunization
update is open from 8:00-11:30 noon, on appointment basis. Clinic is flexible to accept walk-ins
but to a minimum on that day. Clinic is closed on Sundays and holidays.
Standard Operational Procedure No. 1
Process: Reporting to Duty
Objective: To appear professionally when entering working station; and to provide and
serve the patients on a timely manner
Responsibility MCH staff
No. Procedures Standard
1. Punctuality • All staff should report to duty 5-10 minutes prior to
time of duty
8:00 AM – 12:00 PM Morning Clinic
1:00 PM – 5:00 PM Afternoon Clinic
• All staff should punch in and out using the biometric
machine
2. Absent from duty • Staff should immediately notify his/her immediate
supervisor, if he/she is unable to come to work
• Staff should provide a leave slip to his/her supervisor
on the day of absent or one day prior to her/his
leave; or no leave will be granted
3. Grooming • All staff shall follow the MOH dress code
• Female nurse:
- Blue top, and navy blue or black skirt
• Male nurse
- Blue top, and navy blue or black pant
• should wear cleaned and ironed uniform
• Only cleaned white cover shoes are worn
• Female nurse
• Hair has to be neatly tied and above shoulder line
• Male nurse
are not allowed to wear long hair
• All nurses should use mild perfume/deodorants
• All nurses should wear a wrist watch
• Always wear your beautiful and handsome smile
Standard Operational Procedure No. 2
Process: Processing and Handling of Patients Medical Record Chart
Objective: To ensure that patient’s records are properly documented
Responsibility All
No. Procedures Standard
1. Process of Medical • All patients must proceed to medical record
Record Chart department to process their medical chart and
proceed to MCH patient waiting area for the triage
nurse to call them
• Medical record staff should bring patients’ chart to
the MCH Triage room
• All children 0 – 5 years must present with their
yellow card to the medical record department.
Those children without yellow card must see the
immunization clerk to get a copy of a yellow card.
2. Recording and • All patients information should be properly
documenting documented in patients chart
3. Returning of Medical • Charge nurse and clerk must collect all charts, tally
Charts all encounter for that day and transfer data to the
daily encounter log book
• Nurse should ensure that all charts are return to
medical record department at the end of each clinic
day
• No charts are to be kept in the clinic unless needed
by doctors
Standard Operational Procedure No. 3
Process: Triage
Objective: To ensure that patient needs are met in a timely manner with appropriate care
Responsibility Triage nurse
No. Procedures Standard
1. Well-baby Check-up • All patients must proceed to medical record to process
& Immunization their medical charts then proceed to MCH waiting area for
(8:00AM-12:00PM) the triage to call them
• Fill up and complete all necessary forms (immunization
encounter form, the outpatient encounter form, & other
required form)
• Check vital signs and measurement
0-1yr
Patient’s Temperature
Patient’s weight (no clothes)
Patient’s height
Head circumference
Abdomen circumference
Chest circumference
2-5yrs
Patient’s Temperature
Patient’s weight
Patient’s height
All measurement must be in inches, weight in pounds, and
temperature in Fahrenheit
• All Vital signs and measurement must be recorded in
patients charts
• Plot the child weight in both the child yellow card and the
yellow card in the medical record chart- (growth
development section)
• Always fill up the breast feeding section on the
immunization encounter form
• Direct all patients for immunization to the immunization
room
• All children should be seen and examined by a Pediatrician
per MCH Well-Baby check-Up schedule
• Refer all sick patients to pediatrician prior to immunization
2. OPD clinic • All patients must proceed to medical record to process
their medical charts then proceed to MCH waiting area for
the triage nurse to call them
• Clinical supervisor nurse must assign a nurse to assist
doctors at all time
• Take vital signs and Measurement and record in patients’
charts
Vital signs:
- Temperature – (Fahrenheit)
- Pulse rate – as needed
- Respiratory rate – As needed
- Blood Pressure – As needed
Measurement:
- Height/length- inches
- Weight – pounds
• Charge nurse should make sure that surveillance section
on the patient encounter form is filled up
• Prior to OPD clinic assigned nurse must collect lab results
and have them ready for doctors’ used – for follow up
patients
• Assess patient’s condition for any indication of distress or
other condition that will need immediate medical
attention and refer accordingly.
Indications for immediate care include, shortness of
breath, high grade fever, and signs of dehydration)
• Treat patient with high fever per protocol (refer to table
below)
• Apply sponge bath if temperature is greater than 101°F
Acetaminophen: 10 – 20mg /kg/dose q 4 hours
80mg/0.8ml drop; 160mg/5ml syrup
Dose is based on 15mg/kg/dose
Weight Weight Dose Drop Suggested Syrup Suggested
(pound) (kg) (mg) (ml) amt. of drop (ml) amt. of syrup
q4h
5 2.3 34 0.3 0.4ml
10 4.5 68 0.7 0.8ml 2.1 ½ tsp
15 6.8 102 1.0 3.2 ½ tsp
20 9.1 136 4.3 1 tsp
25 11.4 170 5.3 1 tsp
30 13.6 205 6.4 1 tsp
35 15.9 239 7.5 1 ½ tsp
40 18.2 273 8.5 1 ½ tsp
45 20.5 307 9.6 2 tsp
50 22.7 341 10.7 2 tsp
Standard Operational Procedure No. 4
Process: Conducting Immunization Session
Objective: To ensure that all children seen at the clinic are vaccinated with required
immunization
Responsibility Immunization nurse
No. Procedures Standard
1. Routine vaccination • Assess and screen patient prior to vaccination
• Always check BCG result and note result on both
baby’s yellow card and the yellow card in the chart
• Always start with the least painful vaccines or with
vaccines given by mouth/nasal
• Always used the “Five Rights
Right patient
Right drug
Right dose
Right route
Right time
• Use recommended needle size for each vaccine
• Clean injection site prior to vaccination
• Explain to the parents about post vaccination
reaction and treatment (refer to Immunization
guideline)
• An appointment for next immunization visit should
be given before a patient leave the clinic
2. Adult/high risk group • All patient for vaccination should come with an
outpatient encounter form
• All required and recommended vaccine should be
administered on site
• Record all vaccine in the outpatient encounter and
the immunization encounter form
3. walk-in/referring • Make sure patients has his/her outpatient
patient encounter form before vaccination is given
• Check or mark all vaccination given on both
outpatient encounter form and the immunization
encounter form
• All patients that missed their appointment date
must be referred to zone nurses for follow up
• All postpartum mothers and other mothers should
referred to Family Planning Nurse on site for family
planning counselling
3. Recording and • Outpatient encounter
documenting • Record all given vaccines in the immunization and
outpatient encounter forms, on the patient yellow
card, and in the medical record chart
• Submit all immunization encounter form to the data
clerk to enter in the Immunization registry (WEBIZ)
• All immunization data must be enter at the end of
each clinic day
• All appointment for immunization must be logged in
the immunization appointment log book
4. Issuing out
immunization • All children 0-5 years will need their chart from
verification/yellow medical record for immunization update before
card issuing a new verification/yellow card
• Birth certificate must present before processing of
immunization verification/yellow card
• Any lost yellow card will only be issued out when a
receipt of payment is presented to MCH staff –
Payment is made at Health Care Revenue Office
Standard Operational Procedure No. 5
Process: Breast feeding
Objective: To ensure that all mothers have full understanding of the importance of
breast-feeding-exclusively
Responsibility MCH nurse/pediatrician
No. Procedures Standard
1. Breast feeding • Breast feeding education must be provided to all
Education mothers on the 2 weeks visit (postnatal visit)
• Nutrition counselling to mothers as needed
• IEC on Breast feeding will distributed during the
postnatal clinic
• Video showing on breast feeding during postnatal
clinic
2. Recording and • Triage nurse must collect data on breast feeding on
Reporting all children 0-6 months of age (breast feeding
section on the immunization encounter form)
• Triage charge nurse must record breast feeding data
on the breast feeding log book that is place in the
triage room
• Triage charge nurse should compile data and submit
report to Clinical Chief Nurse on a monthly basis
Standard Operational Procedure No. 6
Process: Nebulization treatment
Objective: To ensure safe and proper administration of nebulizer treatment
Responsibility MCH Nurse
No. Procedures Standard
1. Medication supply • Assigned nurse should make sure medication and
other needed supplies are available at all times
Supply needed:
- Albuterol inhalation 5mg/ml
- Albuterol sulfate inhalation solution 2.5mg/3ml
Or whichever is on stock
- Normal Saline
- Syringes
- Needles
- Clean nebulization tubing
- Working nebulizer machine
2. Medication • Nebulization treatment should ONLY administered
Administration/Doses to a patient when indicated by doctors
• Always follow nebulization treatment guideline
Guideline:
Age mg ml NSS
Children 6 yrs to 12 yrs 2.5mg – 5mg 0.5ml 2ml
Below 6yrs 1.25ml 0.25ml 2.5ml
Note: Treatment can be repeat 3-4 times daily
• Do not exceed recommended dose
• Refer patients if no improvement
3. Recording • Always record and document in patient chart
• Record treatment in the nebulization log book
Standard Operational Procedure No. 7
Process: Patient admission
Objective: Admitting patient occurs on a timely and safe manner
Responsibility MCH Nurse
No. Procedures Standard
1. Admitting physician • Complete all doctors’ admitting order
roles • Notify assigned nurse
• Admitting physician may perform procedures, (e.g
IV/Heplock insertion, blood extraction & etc.) in
difficult cases
2. Nurse roles • Review doctor’s admission order
• Notify the Unit about patient admission
Information to provide to the admitting unit
- Patient Age and gender
- Reason for admission
- And other information
• Request lab tests
• Initial IV and po meds should be given at MCH unless
fail to put in IV line
• Make sure all forms and admission note are
completed before transferring patient to the
admitting UNIT
• Patient’s admission information is then enter into
the admission log book
• Transfer patient and endorsed patient to the UNIT
nurse
• Clean and dispose all used supplies in a proper
disposing technique
Standard Operational Procedure No. 8
Process: Maintained a clean and safe working environment
Objective: To ensure clean instrument are used for the patient and safe working
environment
Responsibility Nurse; Immunization program manager
No. Procedures Standard
1. Disinfect and cleaning • Thermoscan thermometer must be clean with ONLY
of medical equipment isopropyl or ethyl alcohol at the end of the day and
as needed
• All Diagnostic set in doctors exam room must be
clean with alcohol or disinfectant solution at the end
of a working day and as needed
• Examination Bed are to be clean at the end of a
working day and as needed
2. Exam rooms • Nurse must clean doctors’ exam room after each
working day
• Nurse must ensure that exam room are stock with
needed medical supply and forms
3. Clean-Up • Cleaning and caring for MCH, is everyone
responsibility and all staff must do their part
• Assigned staff must follow the clean-up schedule
• Always use disinfectant solution for cleaning
4. MCH Vehicle • Program manager should ensure outreach vehicle
are maintain regularly
Standard Operational Procedure No.9
Process: Administering Vitamin A and Dewoming
Objective: To ensure safe and timely administration of Vitamin A and deworming
Responsibility All nurse
No. Procedures Standard
1. Distributing and • Administer twice a year
Administering 1st round March
2nd round September
• Assigned nurse must ensure that clinic is well stocked
• Give vitamin A to all 6mos-14 years during the scheduled
month (at the clinic, zones, outer islands)
• Give deworming to all 2 years to 14 years per
recommended guideline
2. Recording and • Vitamin A and Deworming administration should marked
reporting in child yellow card
• Data are recorded into the Vitamin A and dworming Tally
sheet
• Clinical charge nurse should collect, compile data and
submit to clinical chief nurse – (monthly)
• Same process apply at the zones and outer islands
outreach
3. Recommended • Nurse must follow WHO guideline below:
Vitamin A and Suggested Vitamin A supplementation scheme for children 6-59
deworming dosing months of age
Target group 6mos-11mos 12mos-59mos
Dose 100,000 U 200,000 U
Route Oral Oral
Deworming (Albendazole 400mg)
Target Age group 1yr 2yrs and up
Dose 200mg (1/2 tab) 400mg (1tab)
Route Oral Oral
Deworming (Pyrantel 25omg/5ml)
Target Less than 5yrs to 9yrs 10yrs to 15yrs and
Age group 5yrs 14yrs up
Dose 0.5 tsp 400mg (1tab)
Standard Operational Procedure No.10
Process: Immunization Session in the Community
Objective: To ensure safe vaccine administration and to avoid missed opportunities
Responsibility Zone nurses, cold-chain staff
No. Procedures Standard
1. Preparation • All needed supplies should be prepared a day before
an immunization session is conducted
Needed Supplies:
- syringes 3cc
- needles 25G 1’, G25 ½ ‘,
- BCG syringes
- Gloves all sizes
- Safety box
- Trash bags
- Hand sanitizer
- Alcohol pad
- Forms (encounter forms, zone worksheet,
blank yellow card, adult immunization work
sheet)
- Tables and chairs
- Lap top
- Educational hand outs
• Zone nurse will prepare and submit vaccines request
form to cold-chain staff one day before the session
• Zone nurse must obtain defaulter list from data clerk
• Cold chain staff should prepare and have Vaccines carrier
ready
• Zone nurse must make sure they have all supplies
before they are loaded on the outreach vehicle
2. During immunization • Prior to the session, the nurse must organized their
session working area
• Nurse must record all needed vaccines on the yellow
card and in the immunization encounter form before
a child get vaccinated
• The nurse should Disseminate immunization
handouts to mothers
• Vaccinator must apply safety technique when
vaccinating
• Zone nurse must make sure all required forms are
filled up
• Zone nurse must check and make sure vaccine
temperature are always maintain recommended
range
3. After the session • Zone nurse must clean the area and make sure no
used needles and syringes are left on the ground
• Zone nurse must tabulate doses administration
report and enter to the vaccine request form
• Zone nurse will return all unused vaccines to the
cold chain nurse who will then count them and enter
it to the vaccine request form
• Zone nurse must clean the vaccine carrier and
restock the outreach bag for next session
• Zone nurse must make sure all used syringes and
needles are properly disposed
• Zone nurse must clean the vehicle and make sure no
used needles, syringes and gloves are left in the
vehicle
Standard Operational Procedure No.11
Process: In-house rules
Objective: To have a safe, clean and a positive working environment for the staff and
the patients
Responsibility MCH staff
Standard
• Respect others
• Be a team player
• Come to work on time
• Always keep your supervisor aware
• Give every patient your total attention, patience and courtesy
• No CHEWING BETELNUT
• All staff shall follow and comply with Tobacco Policy
• No eating in the examination rooms
• All staff must follow their assigned schedule
• Always wear gloves during patient contact
• Always apply protective personal equipment (PPE)
• Nurses, always practice “NO RECAP” tech
• Hand washing before and after each patient contact and as needed
• BE ECONOMICAL
Approved by: Herokko Neamon, RN Date: ________________
CN, Public Health Clinic
Dr. Jane Gancio, Pediatrician Date: _________________
Department Head, Pediatric
Dr. Aina Garstang, MO Date: _________________
Director, Public Health
Dr. Tom Jack, MO__________ Date: _________________
Mailynn K. Lang____________ Date: __________________
Deputy Secretary, MOH
Dr. Kenner Briand, MBBS_____ Date: __________________
Secretary of Health

